PUBLISHING.md, before:

# Publishing Guide

This document explains how to publish `cc-check` to multiple package registries for cross-platform, multi-language distribution.

## Overview

`cc-check` is published to:
1. **crates.io** - For Rust users (`cargo install cc-check`)
2. **npm** - For Node.js/JavaScript users (`npm install @arvid-berndtsson/cc-check`)
3. **PyPI** - For Python users (`pip install cc-check`)
4. **GitHub Releases** - Pre-built binaries for all platforms

## Prerequisites

### 1. Trusted Publishing Setup (Recommended)

This project uses **Trusted Publishing** for crates.io, npm, and PyPI, which eliminates the need for long-lived API tokens and significantly improves security. **No GitHub secrets are required for publishing!**

#### crates.io Trusted Publishing

1. **Publish your crate manually first** (required before setting up Trusted Publishing):
   ```bash
   cargo login <your-token>
   cargo publish
   ```

2. **Link your GitHub repository**:
   - Go to your crate page on [crates.io](https://crates.io)
   - Navigate to **Settings** → **Repository**
   - Link your GitHub repository: `arvid-berndtsson/cc-check`

3. **Configure Trusted Publisher**:
   - Go to your crate's **Settings** → **Trusted Publishers**
   - Click **Add Trusted Publisher**
   - Configure:
     - **GitHub Organization/User**: `arvid-berndtsson`
     - **Repository Name**: `cc-check`
     - **Workflow Filename**: `release.yml`
     - **Environment Name**: (leave empty unless using GitHub Environments)
   - Click **Add**

4. **Remove `CARGO_REGISTRY_TOKEN` secret** from GitHub (no longer needed)

#### npm Trusted Publishing

1. **Go to npm Trusted Publishers**:
   - Visit: https://www.npmjs.com/settings/arvid-berndtsson/trusted-publishers
   - Or navigate: npm → Your Profile → Access Tokens → Trusted Publishers

2. **Add a new trusted publisher**:
   - Click **Add Trusted Publisher**
   - Configure:
     - **Publisher name**: `github-actions` (or any name you prefer)
     - **Workflow repository**: `arvid-berndtsson/cc-check`
     - **Workflow file**: `.github/workflows/release.yml`
     - **Environment**: (leave empty unless using GitHub Environments)
   - Click **Add**

3. **Remove `NPM_TOKEN` secret** from GitHub (no longer needed)

#### PyPI Trusted Publishing

1. **Go to PyPI Trusted Publishers**:
   - Visit: https://pypi.org/manage/account/publishing/
   - Or navigate: PyPI → Your Profile → Account settings → Publishing

2. **Add a new trusted publisher**:
   - Click **Add a new pending publisher**
   - Select the **GitHub** tab
   - Fill in:
     - **PyPI Project Name**: `cc-check`
     - **Owner**: `arvid-berndtsson`
     - **Repository Name**: `cc-check`
     - **Workflow Filename**: `.github/workflows/release.yml`
     - **Environment Name**: (leave empty unless using GitHub Environments)
   - Click **Add**

3. **Remove `PYPI_API_TOKEN` secret** from GitHub (no longer needed)

### 2. Package Registry Accounts

- **crates.io**: Create account at https://crates.io (for initial manual publish)
- **npm**: Create account at https://www.npmjs.com
- **PyPI**: Create account at https://pypi.org

### 3. GitHub Secrets

**No secrets required!** All publishing uses Trusted Publishing with OIDC authentication.

## Publishing Process

### Step 1: Update Version

Update the version in:
- `Cargo.toml` (for crates.io)
- `package.json` (for npm)
- `pyproject.toml` (for PyPI)

Use semantic versioning (e.g., `0.1.0`, `0.2.0`, `1.0.0`).

### Step 2: Create Release Commit

```bash
# Update versions in all files
# Then commit and tag
git add Cargo.toml package.json pyproject.toml
git commit -m "chore(release): v0.1.0"
git tag v0.1.0
git push origin main --tags
```

### Step 3: Automated Publishing

When you push a tag starting with `v`, GitHub Actions will:

1. **Build binaries** for all platforms:
   - Linux (x86_64, ARM64)
   - macOS (x86_64, ARM64)
   - Windows (x86_64)

2. **Create GitHub Release** with all binaries

3. **Publish to registries**:
   - crates.io (Rust)
   - npm (Node.js)
   - PyPI (Python)

## Manual Publishing (Alternative)

If you prefer to publish manually:

### crates.io

```bash
# Only needed for initial manual publish before setting up Trusted Publishing
cargo login <your-token>
cargo publish
```

### npm

```bash
npm login
npm publish
```

### PyPI

```bash
python -m pip install build twine
python -m build
twine upload dist/*
```

## Package-Specific Notes

### npm Package

The npm package includes:
- Pre-built binaries in `bin/` directory
- Post-install script to download correct binary for platform
- Platform detection for Windows/Linux/macOS

**Note**: You'll need to implement the postinstall script to download binaries from GitHub Releases.

### PyPI Package

The PyPI package uses:
- `pyproject.toml` for modern Python packaging
- Platform-specific wheels with embedded binaries
- Support for Python 3.8+

**Note**: You'll need to create platform-specific wheels with embedded binaries.

### crates.io

The Rust package is straightforward:
- Just publish the crate
- Users can install with `cargo install cc-check`
- Binary is automatically available in `~/.cargo/bin/`

## Cross-Compilation

The GitHub Actions workflow builds for multiple targets:

```bash
# Linux
x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu
aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu

# macOS
x86_64-apple-darwin
aarch64-apple-darwin

# Windows
x86_64-pc-windows-msvc
```

## Testing Before Publishing

1. **Test locally**:
   ```bash
   cargo test
   cargo build --release
   ```

2. **Test dry-run publish**:
   ```bash
   cargo publish --dry-run
   npm pack  # Creates tarball without publishing
   python -m build  # Builds without uploading
   ```

3. **Test on CI**: Push to a branch and verify CI passes

## Version Management

Follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/):
- **MAJOR**: Breaking changes
- **MINOR**: New features (backward compatible)
- **PATCH**: Bug fixes (backward compatible)

Update all version numbers in:
- `Cargo.toml`
- `package.json`
- `pyproject.toml`

## Troubleshooting

### crates.io

- **Error**: "crate already exists" - Version already published, bump version
- **Error**: "authentication failed" - Verify Trusted Publisher is configured correctly in crate settings
- **Error**: "repository not linked" - Link your GitHub repository in crate settings

### npm

- **Error**: "package name taken" - Choose different name or use scoped package (`@your-org/cc-check`)
- **Error**: "unauthorized" - Verify Trusted Publisher is configured correctly in npm settings
- **Error**: "OTP required" - Trusted Publishing should eliminate this; verify OIDC setup

### PyPI

- **Error**: "File already exists" - Version already published, bump version
- **Error**: "authentication failed" - Verify Trusted Publisher is configured correctly in PyPI settings
- **Error**: "publisher not found" - Ensure the trusted publisher is added and approved in PyPI

## Next Steps

1. Set up Trusted Publishing for crates.io and npm (see Prerequisites above)
2. Add `PYPI_API_TOKEN` secret to GitHub (only secret needed)
3. Create accounts on all registries
4. Test the workflow with a pre-release version (e.g., `0.1.0-alpha.1`)
5. Publish first stable release

Commit message:

fix(npm): improve Trusted Publishing configuration and debugging
The package exists on npm but publish fails with 404, suggesting
a Trusted Publishing authentication issue. Improve configuration
and add better error messages.

Changes:
- Add publishConfig.access to package.json for scoped packages
- Improve npm configuration verification step
- Add better debugging output for Trusted Publishing
- Update documentation with troubleshooting steps for 404 errors

The 404 error for an existing package typically means:
1. Trusted Publisher not configured correctly in npm
2. Workflow file path mismatch
3. OIDC authentication not working

Verify Trusted Publisher is 'Active' (not 'Pending') in npm settings
and that the workflow file path matches exactly.

PUBLISHING.md, after:

# Publishing Guide

This document explains how to publish `cc-check` to multiple package registries for cross-platform, multi-language distribution.

## Overview

`cc-check` is published to:
1. **crates.io** - For Rust users (`cargo install cc-check`)
2. **npm** - For Node.js/JavaScript users (`npm install @arvid-berndtsson/cc-check`)
3. **PyPI** - For Python users (`pip install cc-check`)
4. **GitHub Releases** - Pre-built binaries for all platforms

## Prerequisites

### 1. Trusted Publishing Setup (Recommended)

This project uses **Trusted Publishing** for crates.io, npm, and PyPI, which eliminates the need for long-lived API tokens and significantly improves security. **No GitHub secrets are required for publishing!**

#### crates.io Trusted Publishing

1. **Publish your crate manually first** (required before setting up Trusted Publishing):
   ```bash
   cargo login <your-token>
   cargo publish
   ```

2. **Link your GitHub repository**:
   - Go to your crate page on [crates.io](https://crates.io)
   - Navigate to **Settings** → **Repository**
   - Link your GitHub repository: `arvid-berndtsson/cc-check`

3. **Configure Trusted Publisher**:
   - Go to your crate's **Settings** → **Trusted Publishers**
   - Click **Add Trusted Publisher**
   - Configure:
     - **GitHub Organization/User**: `arvid-berndtsson`
     - **Repository Name**: `cc-check`
     - **Workflow Filename**: `release.yml`
     - **Environment Name**: (leave empty unless using GitHub Environments)
   - Click **Add**

4. **Remove `CARGO_REGISTRY_TOKEN` secret** from GitHub (no longer needed)

#### npm Trusted Publishing

1. **Go to npm Trusted Publishers**:
   - Visit: https://www.npmjs.com/settings/arvid-berndtsson/trusted-publishers
   - Or navigate: npm → Your Profile → Access Tokens → Trusted Publishers

2. **Add a new trusted publisher**:
   - Click **Add Trusted Publisher**
   - Configure:
     - **Publisher name**: `github-actions` (or any name you prefer)
     - **Workflow repository**: `arvid-berndtsson/cc-check`
     - **Workflow file**: `.github/workflows/release.yml`
     - **Environment**: (leave empty unless using GitHub Environments)
   - Click **Add**

3. **Verify the trusted publisher is active**:
   - The publisher should show as "Active" in the list
   - If it shows "Pending", wait a few minutes for it to activate

4. **Verify Trusted Publisher is active**:
   - The publisher should show as "Active" in the list
   - If it shows "Pending", wait a few minutes for it to activate
   - Ensure the workflow file path matches exactly: `.github/workflows/release.yml`

5. **Troubleshooting 404 errors**:
   - If you get a 404 error when publishing, verify:
     - Trusted Publisher is "Active" (not "Pending")
     - Workflow file path matches exactly (including `.github/` prefix)
     - Repository name matches exactly: `arvid-berndtsson/cc-check`
     - The workflow has `id-token: write` permission
   - For scoped packages, ensure `--access=public` is included in publish command
   - If package already exists on npm, the 404 might indicate authentication issue

6. **Remove `NPM_TOKEN` secret** from GitHub (no longer needed)

#### PyPI Trusted Publishing

1. **Go to PyPI Trusted Publishers**:
   - Visit: https://pypi.org/manage/account/publishing/
   - Or navigate: PyPI → Your Profile → Account settings → Publishing

2. **Add a new trusted publisher**:
   - Click **Add a new pending publisher**
   - Select the **GitHub** tab
   - Fill in:
     - **PyPI Project Name**: `cc-check`
     - **Owner**: `arvid-berndtsson`
     - **Repository Name**: `cc-check`
     - **Workflow Filename**: `.github/workflows/release.yml`
     - **Environment Name**: (leave empty unless using GitHub Environments)
   - Click **Add**

3. **Remove `PYPI_API_TOKEN` secret** from GitHub (no longer needed)

### 2. Package Registry Accounts

- **crates.io**: Create account at https://crates.io (for initial manual publish)
- **npm**: Create account at https://www.npmjs.com
- **PyPI**: Create account at https://pypi.org

### 3. GitHub Secrets

**No secrets required!** All publishing uses Trusted Publishing with OIDC authentication.

## Publishing Process

### Step 1: Update Version

Update the version in:
- `Cargo.toml` (for crates.io)
- `package.json` (for npm)
- `pyproject.toml` (for PyPI)

Use semantic versioning (e.g., `0.1.0`, `0.2.0`, `1.0.0`).

### Step 2: Create Release Commit

```bash
# Update versions in all files
# Then commit and tag
git add Cargo.toml package.json pyproject.toml
git commit -m "chore(release): v0.1.0"
git tag v0.1.0
git push origin main --tags
```

### Step 3: Automated Publishing

When you push a tag starting with `v`, GitHub Actions will:

1. **Build binaries** for all platforms:
   - Linux (x86_64, ARM64)
   - macOS (x86_64, ARM64)
   - Windows (x86_64)

2. **Create GitHub Release** with all binaries

3. **Publish to registries**:
   - crates.io (Rust)
   - npm (Node.js)
   - PyPI (Python)

## Manual Publishing (Alternative)

If you prefer to publish manually:

### crates.io

```bash
# Only needed for initial manual publish before setting up Trusted Publishing
cargo login <your-token>
cargo publish
```

### npm

```bash
npm login
npm publish
```

### PyPI

```bash
python -m pip install build twine
python -m build
twine upload dist/*
```

## Package-Specific Notes

### npm Package

The npm package includes:
- Pre-built binaries in `bin/` directory
- Post-install script to download correct binary for platform
- Platform detection for Windows/Linux/macOS

**Note**: You'll need to implement the postinstall script to download binaries from GitHub Releases.

### PyPI Package

The PyPI package uses:
- `pyproject.toml` for modern Python packaging
- Platform-specific wheels with embedded binaries
- Support for Python 3.8+

**Note**: You'll need to create platform-specific wheels with embedded binaries.

### crates.io

The Rust package is straightforward:
- Just publish the crate
- Users can install with `cargo install cc-check`
- Binary is automatically available in `~/.cargo/bin/`

## Cross-Compilation

The GitHub Actions workflow builds for multiple targets:

```bash
# Linux
x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu
aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu

# macOS
x86_64-apple-darwin
aarch64-apple-darwin

# Windows
x86_64-pc-windows-msvc
```

## Testing Before Publishing

1. **Test locally**:
   ```bash
   cargo test
   cargo build --release
   ```

2. **Test dry-run publish**:
   ```bash
   cargo publish --dry-run
   npm pack  # Creates tarball without publishing
   python -m build  # Builds without uploading
   ```

3. **Test on CI**: Push to a branch and verify CI passes

## Version Management

Follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/):
- **MAJOR**: Breaking changes
- **MINOR**: New features (backward compatible)
- **PATCH**: Bug fixes (backward compatible)

Update all version numbers in:
- `Cargo.toml`
- `package.json`
- `pyproject.toml`

## Troubleshooting

### crates.io

- **Error**: "crate already exists" - Version already published, bump version
- **Error**: "authentication failed" - Verify Trusted Publisher is configured correctly in crate settings
- **Error**: "repository not linked" - Link your GitHub repository in crate settings

### npm

- **Error**: "package name taken" - Choose different name or use scoped package (`@your-org/cc-check`)
- **Error**: "unauthorized" - Verify Trusted Publisher is configured correctly in npm settings
- **Error**: "OTP required" - Trusted Publishing should eliminate this; verify OIDC setup

### PyPI

- **Error**: "File already exists" - Version already published, bump version
- **Error**: "authentication failed" - Verify Trusted Publisher is configured correctly in PyPI settings
- **Error**: "publisher not found" - Ensure the trusted publisher is added and approved in PyPI

## Next Steps

1. Set up Trusted Publishing for crates.io and npm (see Prerequisites above)
2. Add `PYPI_API_TOKEN` secret to GitHub (only secret needed)
3. Create accounts on all registries
4. Test the workflow with a pre-release version (e.g., `0.1.0-alpha.1`)
5. Publish first stable release
